JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: the
latest look
at the money the presidential
nominees are
raising and spending.
We break down how the candidates
compare on
campaign cash.
Then: running towards danger.
Known as the White Helmets,
Syria's civil
defense rescue teams search for
lives in the
rubble while risking their own.
RADI SAAD, Rescue Worker
(through translator):
You get tired, but the hope
inside you makes
you forget, and you just keep
going to try
to reach the person who needs
your help.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And an Islamic
militant apologizes
for destroying religious
monuments in Timbuktu
in the first ever war crimes
trial for cultural
destruction.
All that and more on tonight's a
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republican
presidential hopeful
Donald Trump insisted today he's
not flip-flopping
on his plan to deport some 11
million people
living in the U.S. illegally.
That came after his campaign
appeared to signal
a shift in his immigration
policy over the
weekend.
For his part, Democratic vice
presidential
nominee Tim Kaine said that
Trump's conflicting
messages show he can't be
trusted.
We will take a closer look at
the campaign
right after this news summary.
A federal judge in Texas has
temporarily blocked
the Obama administration's
guidelines on transgender
bathroom policies in public
schools.
They permitted students to use
restrooms that
correspond to their chosen
gender identity.
The district court judge granted
the nationwide
injunction late Sunday, a move
that had been
sought by 13 states.
Still, White House spokesman
Josh Earnest
defended the president's
directive today in
Washington.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
Our goal has been from the
beginning to provide
for the safety, and security,
and dignity
of students all across the
country.
We certainly have the confidence
in the legal
basis for issuing that guidance.
But, obviously, we're respectful
of rulings
that are put forward by federal
judges.
And I will let my colleagues at
the Department
of Justice speak to the next
step in the legal
process.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will explore
the implications
of the Texas ruling later in the
program.
Russia has stopped using an
Iranian military
base to launch airstrikes in
Syria, for now.
The announcement came just hours
after Iran's
foreign minister criticized
Moscow for publicizing
their actions.
Meanwhile, airstrikes continued
across Syria
today, that as U.S. Secretary of
State John
Kerry on a trip to Kenya said
talks with Russia
on stemming the violence are --
quote -- "reaching
an end."
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: It is
possible that something could be
agreed at
-- upon before the end of the
month, but I
can't tell you whether it's
likely.
I wouldn't express optimism.
I would express hope.
I will say this.
This has to end, this Syrian
travesty.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also today: A
Kurdish militia
launched a major assault on the
northeastern
city of Hasakah to seize the
last remaining
government-held areas there.
The death toll from a weekend
suicide attack
at a wedding in Turkey has risen
to 54 people.
At least 22 victims in
Saturday's bombing
near the Syrian border were
younger than 14.
Officials and residents cleaned
up around
the attack site today, as
relatives buried
their loved ones.
Turkey's foreign minister vowed
to battle
the Islamic State group.
MEVLUT CAVUSOGLU, Turkish
Foreign Minister
(through translator): We will
fight against
the Islamic State and other
terrorist organizations
until the end.
And we will continue to support
countries
and forces who are also fighting
it.
As you know, the Syrian
opposition's operations
at our border were concluded
successfully.
And, of course, our border needs
to be completely
cleansed of ISIS.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ISIS has yet to
officially
claim responsibility for the
wedding massacre.
But they have been blamed for
similar attacks
in the country in the past.
In the Philippines, there's been
a dramatic
spike in the number of people
killed as part
of all crackdown on drugs.
It began after new President
Rodrigo Duterte
took office seven weeks ago.
Nearly 1,800 drug suspects have
now been killed;
712 of them died in police
clashes.
That's up from 525 earlier this
month.
And more than 1,000 other people
were killed
by vigilante groups.
Tokyo was battered by heavy rain
and strong
winds today after a powerful
typhoon made
landfall just south of the
Japanese capital.
Some 500,000 residents were
advised to evacuate,
and at least one person died.
Winds gusted up to 112 miles an
hour across
the city, and swollen rivers
sparked fears
of flooding.
Elsewhere, a commuter train
derailed, and
hundreds of flights were
grounded.
India is contending with its own
deluge today.
At least 40 people have died in
flooding that's
inundated central and eastern
parts of the
country.
Hundreds of thousands of people
have been
forced to flee.
Days of heavy rain caused the
Ganges River
to rise above its danger level.
It's all part of India's monsoon
season, which
runs from June through
September.
Stocks were mostly lower on Wall
Street today,
as a drop in oil prices dragged
down energy
shares.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 23 points
to close at 18529.
The Nasdaq rose six points, and
the S&P 500
dropped a point.
And Olympic medalist Ryan Lochte
lost all
four of his major sponsors
today, Speedo,
Ralph Lauren, skin care firm
Syneron-Candela,
and Airweave Mattress announced
they're ending
their endorsements, after the
swimmer's drunken
incident during the Rio
Olympics.
Speedo plans to donate $50,000
of Lochte's
fee to Save the Children in
order to help
the needy in Brazil.
Lochte has apologized for making
the claim
he made about an armed robbery.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
where the
Clinton campaign is vastly
outspending Donald
Trump; the issues still plaguing
the two candidates
less than three months before
Election Day;
the first-responders behind the
image that
caught the world's attention;
and much more.
the first-responders behind the
image that
caught the world's attention;
and much more.
We begin tonight with politics,
and the role
of money in the campaign for the
White House.
New Federal Election Commission
reports spell
out how much each of the
candidates has raised
and spent so far.
For the Democrats, Hillary
Clinton spent nearly
$49 million in July, while
Republican Donald
Trump spent $18.4 million, a
little over a
third of what Clinton spent.
Since the race began, the
Clinton campaign
has spent $319 million, while
the Trump campaign
has spent $89.5 million.
We catch up on all of this now
with Matea
Gold.
She covers money and influence
for The Washington
Post.
And we welcome you back to the
"NewsHour."
MATEA GOLD, The Washington Post:
Great to
be with you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Matea, when
you look at
these numbers that we have just
cited of what
these two candidates have spent,
what does
that tell you about their
priorities?
MATEA GOLD: ®MD+IT /MD-IT /Well,
I have
to say, when Donald Trump's
filing came in
late Saturday night, it was
incredibly surprising.
He had actually had a very
successful fund-raising
month in July.
He actually almost matched
Clinton and the
DNC through his fund-raising in
conjunction
with the RNC.
So, we expected to see a lot of
spending.
But, really, this is a
reflection of the completely
unorthodox approach that Trump
has taken to
this campaign.
He actually really has scoffed
at some of
the traditional campaign
investments that
you see campaigns making over
the years.
So, for one, he doesn't believe
in expensive
TV ads.
He's just starting that right
now.
And he hasn't built a big
infrastructure on
the ground.
And those are the two big
differences.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And speaking --
one way to
look at infrastructure, I guess,
is the number
of staff they have hired.
And you look at that and you see
that in these
numbers of what you found in
their filings.
MATEA GOLD: Yes, it's really
remarkable, Judy.
So, by the end of July, Clinton
had 705 paid
staffers, and Trump had 82,
barely just maybe
a half-dozen more than he had in
June.
This is a period of time that
both of the
candidates were receiving their
nominations
at the conventions, a time when
candidates
traditionally are gearing up for
the final
four months of campaign.
And, really, what's happening
here is Donald
Trump is leaning on the
Republican National
Committee, the national party,
to provide
the kind of ground voter
motivation that often
usually the candidate takes the
lead in doing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And when you
contrast, I think,
the size of -- the small size of
Donald Trump's
staff compared to previous
presidential campaigns,
it's really -- it's a notable
difference.
MATEA GOLD: No, there is no
comparison.
And what of the things that I
think worries
actually Trump allies is that
he's too vulnerable
by leaning on the RNC in this
way.
If Trump's numbers do not
improve late in
the fall, if the RNC decides to
have its folks
on the ground focus on Senate
and House candidates,
as opposed to really pushing
their presidential
candidate, he really won't have
anyone there
to make up the difference.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, Matea, you
also told us,
it's interesting when you look
at these numbers,
how much they spent on
television on advertising.
What do you find there?
MATEA GOLD: They're really
mind-blowing.
By the end of July, Clinton's
campaign had
already spent $108 million on TV
production
and airtime.
They just announced today
another $80 million
on national cable.
Trump, by comparison, last week
launched his
first general election ad, $4.8
million.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what is the
campaign -- what
is the Trump camp saying about
this?
MATEA GOLD: So, their argument
is, they don't
need television in the way that
she does.
He has a huge megaphone through
earned media,
as we have talked about already
in this election.
His every remark, every
speech...
JUDY WOODRUFF: News coverage.
MATEA GOLD: Exactly.
His every remark and every tweet
gets incredibly
amplified through the media.
And he reaches people directly
through social
media, so they really don't feel
like they
have to spend in the ways that
she does.
And, in fact, we saw that this
race was very
tight up and through the summer
until the
conventions, at the time she was
spending
a lot on television.
And that validated their theory
of theirs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, let's look,
Matea, at
where the money is coming from.
The campaigns confirmed some
numbers we actually
saw a few days ago, that she
raised aids about
$90 million in July, he raised
about $82 million.
It sounds like relative parity
there, but
what more is there to see?
MATEA GOLD: Well, one of the
mysteries of
Trump's filing is why there
wasn't more in
his actual campaign account by
the end of
the month.
His campaign has said they had
raised about
$64 million online and through
direct mail
with the party.
We thought we would see most of
that in his
campaign.
He ended up just reporting $36
million in
his campaign, which suggests a
lot of that
money hasn't been transferred
over from the
joint fund-raising committee or
has been spent
in another way.
And...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me just stop
you there.
MATEA GOLD: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Explain the
difference between
the joint fund-raising committee
and the campaign,
those two pots.
MATEA GOLD: Yes.
So, there's -- both of the
candidates actually
are working through two joint
fund-raising
committees.
It's basically a committee that
raises money
for both the campaign and the
national party
and splits the proceeds.
And so a share of the money that
goes into
the joint fund-raising committee
legally goes
to the campaign.
Another share goes to the
national party.
And, usually, the small
donations end up with
the campaign.
And those are really
traditionally the most
valuable, because the candidate
controls that
money and can really direct
those resources.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And speaking of
small donations,
it's interesting how much of the
money -- to
look at how much came from
donors giving $200
or less, with Clinton, $62
million, 18 percent
of what she raised.
But, for Trump, it was 30 --
over 30 percent.
MATEA GOLD: There is no question
that, as
soon as he finally began
fund-raising, he
tapped into incredible
enthusiasm among his
supporters, and, in fact,
caught, I think,
the Clinton campaign by surprise
with how
much money he was able to raise
so quickly
online through small donors.
And he's also put in a large
share of his
own money, $52 million by the
end of July,
into this presidential bid.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fascinating.
One month's reporting, there's a
lot there.
Matea Gold with The Washington
Post, we thank
you.
MATEA GOLD: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, now let's
turn to Politics
Monday with Amy Walter of The
Cook Political
Report, Tamara Keith of NPR.
So, Amy and Tam, let's talk
about what Matea
was just reporting.
Amy, when you hear these numbers
and you see
what Donald Trump is spending,
what Hillary
Clinton is spending money on,
what does that
tell you about the state of
these campaigns?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Well,
I think Matea put it quite well.
We're just dealing with two very
different
theories of the case here.
And the Donald Trump campaign
is, he's operating
-- it's like in a parallel
universe, where
the normal rules of campaigning
don't apply.
You don't need staff.
You don't need advertising, that
your megaphone
being this media coverage is
going to be enough
to do that.
But it's clear that that's not
really working
anymore.
And you can see it in these
battleground states,
especially states where Hillary
Clinton has
been spending a great deal of
money.
Donald Trump is falling behind,
in some cases,
falling so far behind that the
Clinton campaign
now is saying, look, we have a
state like
Virginia -- that's a
battleground state -- Colorado,
a battleground state, they're
not going to
advertise there anymore because
they feel
so confident with their lead in
those states.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Tam, it's
interesting
that you're able to say
something like this,
this early.
I realize it's November.
It's two-and-a-half months away,
but it's
still -- there is still time to
go in this
campaign.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Yes,
and the Clinton campaign does
point out that
they could reverse course and
start running
ads in those states.
But they have been since June
really pushing
this message very hard that
Donald Trump is
-- quote -- "temperamentally
unfit," that
he shouldn't have his finger
near the button.
They're out with a new ad on
that topic again
today.
They have really been driving
that message.
And, you know, I went to a
Donald Trump event
last week and was talking to his
supporters,
and they'd all seen Hillary
Clinton's ads.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Huh.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
And even building on Matea's
thing, the group
called Open Secrets, which also
looks at campaign
spending, their analysis found
that the RNC
now has less in the bank at this
point in
the campaign than they have in
the last three
elections.
So, 2004, 2008, 2012, they had
more money
in the bank at this time than
they do now.
The DCCC, which is the House
arm, fund-raising
arm for the Democrats, outraised
House Republicans
in July by three times as much.
So this isn't just about the
Trump campaign.
This could trickle down into the
others as
well.
TAMARA KEITH: And what is
notable about those
RNC numbers is that Donald Trump
is leaning
so heavily on the RNC to do most
of the basic
fundamentals of a campaign.
And the RNC has less money than
it's had in
the past.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, I want
to quickly
move on to another issue that
has been bubbling
up again.
On CNN yesterday, Trump's new
campaign manager,
Kellyanne, was asked whether
Trump, as president,
for push for deportation forces
-- this is
a term he has used -- to remove
undocumented
immigrants from the United
States.
Conway said -- quote -- "That is
to be determined."
But it was something that Trump
had called
for previously.
So, on FOX News, in a phone
interview this
morning, Trump was asked whether
he has changed
his mind.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I will tell you, we're dealing
with people.
We have to be very firm.
We have to be very, very strong
when people
come in illegally.
We have a lot of people that
want to come
in through the legal process.
It's not fair for them.
And we're working with a lot of
people in
the Hispanic community to try
and come up
with an answer.
QUESTION: So, you're not
flip-flopping?
DONALD TRUMP: No, I'm not
flip-flopping.
We want to come up with really
fair, but firm
answer.
It has to be very firm.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, later today
at a union
convention in Las Vegas,
Democratic vice presidential
nominee Tim Kaine told the
people there they
shouldn't be swayed by Trump's
new talk of
a firm, but fair immigration
plan.
SEN.
TIM KAINE (D-VA), Vice
Presidential Candidate:
He's not changing his policies,
not by an
inch.
He is still going to have the
deportation
force.
He is still going to have
separate families.
He says he's not flip-flopping
on immigration.
That's what his campaign says.
But we can't afford to be
tricked by Trump.
This deportation thing is just
another one.
He is saying that he will try to
deport people
in a humane way, whatever that
means.
It's just wrong.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Amy, what is
going on here?
What do we think is the thinking
in Trump's
mind?
AMY WALTER: Yes.
You know, it's clear from
listening to his
campaign surrogates and even
listening to
Trump in these last couple of
days, he understands
there's a softening that needs
to happen around
some of these issues, especially
something
like mass deportation of 11
million immigrants.
But it's also clear that it's
really late
in the game to change people's
perceptions
of him.
I'm sure you see this, hear the
same thing.
If you sit with a group of
voters and ask
them, what do you know about
Donald Trump,
the first thing they will say is
the wall.
The second thing they will say
is a ban on
Muslims.
Having a deportation, having
this fight over
deportation, I don't think, is
going to change
the basic perception that voters
have of Donald
Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It sounds like
there is some
kind of battle going on, though,
inside the
Trump camp, Tamara, because
earlier today
we were told that he was going
to make a speech
on immigration.
And now we learn it's not going
to happen
this week.
TAMARA KEITH: Right, and that
maybe it's still
a work in progress.
I think that it will be hard to
know exactly
what his position is or whether
it's changed
on immigration until we hear
that speech,
and even once we do hear the
speech, it may
be hard to know precisely what
the policy
proposal is.
He has talked about a
deportation force before,
and then said it would be
humane, they could
take their family with them, the
citizen members
of their family with them.
So, at this point, it's really
not clear to
me whether there is movement
happening or
not.
AMY WALTER: And who it's aimed
at.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
AMY WALTER: Some of this is
aimed at making
those white college suburban
voters who have
been moving away from Donald
Trump more comfortable
with him and his rhetoric.
But, at the same time, why those
voters, especially
if you talk to a lot of women
voters who live
in those suburban areas, the
number one concern
they have about Donald Trump is
his temperament
and the idea of him as commander
in chief,
which is why Hillary Clinton
campaign out
today making a very clear
statement about
his temperament and his fitness
for office
with the concept that Tam
mentioned.
Do you really want this guy with
his finger
on the button?
The campaign ends -- the ad ends
with the
sound of jet fighters is this
the risk -- basically
saying, is this the risk you
want to take?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, meanwhile,
the immigration
story continues boiling.
For Hillary Clinton's part, Tam,
though, the
e-mail story keeps bubbling.
And there are three different
strands of it
today, what appears to be the
difference she's
had with former Secretary of
State Colin Powell,
who is saying that he thinks the
Clinton camp
is trying to pin the e-mail
problem on him
because she told the FBI that
she got the
idea for personal -- using
personal e-mail
from General Powell.
Then you have got two other
stories that the
State Department is going to be
releasing
15,000 previously undisclosed
e-mails sometime
in October, and then another
strand of e-mails
today having to do with the
Clinton Foundation
exchanging notes with Clinton's
aide.
Is this just destined to be with
us until
Election Day?
TAMARA KEITH: You think it will
stop then?
(LAUGHTER)
TAMARA KEITH: Right.
I don't think it's going to stop
with Election
Day.
AMY WALTER: I agree.
TAMARA KEITH: On the Colin
Powell thing, he
has reportedly said: I told her
that I used
my AOL account.
That worked better.
He, by no means -- nobody is
arguing that
he said, go put a server in your
basement.
So, you know, there is that.
Judicial Watch, which is a
conservative group
that has been looking for
problems for Hillary
Clinton, has been releasing a
steady stream
of e-mails.
And some of this is part of
that.
And there is this question that
keeps coming
up about the Clinton Foundation
and the relationship
between staff at the Clinton
Foundation and
staff at the State Department
who worked for
Hillary Clinton.
What the Clinton campaign would
say in response
to all of that is that there is
no evidence
the she did favors for anyone,
that Secretary
Clinton did.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Amy, the
bottom line is,
does this hurt her?
AMY WALTER: Right.
It keeps coming back to, well,
two things.
If you're going to pin something
on somebody,
first, make sure they know that
you are going
to do that.
And, second, make sure they have
a buy-in.
Right?
You probably should do both
those things.
But the second is, we just live
in a world
that's very different from the
way it was
20 or 30 years ago in the way
that people
view institutions and the sense
of distrust
and dysfunction about whether
it's about government,
whether it's about corporations,
whether it's
about the media.
And so any appearance of
impropriety is going
to be taken very, very
seriously.
The issue now -- or the
watchword really is
transparency, authenticity.
Those are things that have been
missing from
the Clinton campaign and from,
quite frankly
the way that Hillary Clinton has
done her
job as secretary of state, and
then the Clinton
Global Initiative from the very
beginning.
So, the expectations are very
different, and
they're not meeting those
expectations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some of these
themes just keep
on popping up again and again.
AMY WALTER: It's exactly right.
If you think we're going to see
the end it
-- it's not.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter,
Tamara Keith, we
thank you.
AMY WALTER: Thank you.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
what a judge's
ruling means for President
Obama's order on
transgender students; a jihadist
charged with
war crimes for destroying
ancient monuments;
and a Massachusetts couple's
plan to end hunger
and keep their son's memory
alive.
But, first: Virtually every day,
the skies
over Northern Syria are filled
with Russian
and Assad regime jets, and,
often, the bombs
they drop land on civilians.
There is no 911 to dial, and no
one to call
for help.
But people do come rushing to
save them, and
more often than not, the
rescuers are Syrians
wearing white helmets.
They are ordinary men and women
who've chosen
to stay, pressed into service by
circumstance,
charged with saving their fellow
Syrians amid
a brutal war.
We meet some of them now, thanks
to special
correspondent Marcia Biggs, who
reports from
Turkey.
MARCIA BIGGS: We all saw this
heartbreaking
video, 5-year-old Omran pulled
from under
the rubble of his flattened
home, his photo
going viral.
Stunned, bloodied, and caked
with dust, his
face a symbol of so many others.
But the faces you didn't see in
this video
are of those who have been
pulling people
out of the rubble for five long
years.
This is the call to work for the
brave members
of the Syrian Civil Defense, an
ad hoc grassroots
first-response unit within
rebel-held Syria.
Nicknamed the White Helmets,
they rush toward
the scene of a bombing to save
victims, many
of whom are trapped under
rubble, once tailors,
bakers, pharmacists, these 3,000
ordinary
Syrian men and some women now
unwitting heroes.
Twenty-three-year-old Radi Saad
was a topography
student at Aleppo University
itching to get
out of Syria, when the
revolution began and
his life changed.
He now lives in Turkey, but
travels back and
forth to Syria to volunteer.
RADI SAAD, Rescue Worker
(through translator):
I never thought about being a
search-and-rescue
worker.
That idea didn't exist in Syria.
During shelling or after an
airstrike, all
the people come out to save
lives.
When someone in need comes to
you, would you
say, I have nothing to offer
you?
So then why am I here?
This is a question I asked
myself.
That was three years ago, and I
have been
working in civil defense ever
since.
MARCIA BIGGS: They work under
the harshest
of conditions to claw through
the remains
of buildings flattened by the
Syrian regime's
weapon of choice, the barrel
bomb, a crudely
made drum packed with explosives
and nails,
indiscriminately rolled out the
back of a
helicopter over civilian areas,
the slow and
silent descent a cruel harbinger
of the devastation
it creates.
RADI SAAD (through translator):
The hardest
part is to get people under the
rubble out.
It's exhausting, and you don't
have technical
equipment to use.
You have simple equipment.
Often, the process of searching
and rescuing
takes 30 or 40 continuous hours.
You get tired, but the hope
inside you makes
you forget, and you just keep
going to try
to reach the person who needs
your help.
MARCIA BIGGS: Not all stories
have a happy
ending.
Radi remembers searching in vain
for 25 hours
for a 2-month-old child.
RADI SAAD (through translator):
His father
came to me, and I was the team
leader.
He was begging me, not to
continue trying
to find his son.
No, he just wanted me to find
any piece of
his son's body.
These were moments I would never
forget.
You're not thinking.
You're in a huge disaster, so
you don't think
about what's happening.
Your emotions go away.
You don't have them anymore.
When I got home that night, I
remembered,
and I felt the same feeling I
have now.
I was shocked.
Do we have any feeling left?
Have we lost our feelings?
Has the hope become about
finding a piece
of a loved one, a body part?
Even now, I can't comprehend the
situation
I was in or what happened.
MARCIA BIGGS: But what makes it
one of the
most dangerous jobs in the
world, the infamous
double tap, when planes circle
back after
the original strike to target
rescue workers
racing to the scene.
Last October, White Helmets were
responding
to this bombing in Idlib
province when Russian
jets circled back, killing
31-year-old Issam
al-Saleh (ph).
RADI SAAD (through translator):
I heard that
Russian airstrikes targeted a
farm with women
and children, so I jumped in the
car and went.
I couldn't drive fast enough.
When I arrived, no one was
there, just people
under the rubble, but the jets
were coming
back.
When I heard that Issam had
died, it was a
big shock.
When we buried him, we all
started crying.
Issam was like a brother to me.
MARCIA BIGGS: Issam's cousin,
Raed Al Saleh,
is the head of Syrian Civil
Defense, like
most White Helmets, thrust into
a job he never
dreamed he'd have.
RAED AL SALEH, Director, Syrian
Civil Defense
(through translator): Actually,
my work in
civil defense just kind of
happened.
At that time, none of us in
Syria knew anything
about civil defense, or how this
work is done.
So we went to a training in
Istanbul.
A trainer put us in a dark room
and asked
what we were able to find.
We said there was just debris,
but then he
turned on the light and we
realized there
were people pretending to be
wounded.
It shocked us that we hadn't
found them.
We decided then and there that
we had to be
serious about our training.
Your mother or mine, your sister
or brother,
your friend could be under the
rubble, and
if they are not found, they will
die.
MARCIA BIGGS: Over the last five
years, they
say they have learned, saving
almost 60,000
lives, working throughout all
parts of one
of the most fractured areas on
Earth.
Even some of the most radical
groups allow
them into their territory.
RAED AL SALEH (through
translator): To serve
the civilians in the regions
under control
of armed groups, we have no
choice but to
deal with such groups in order
to do our work.
This happens all over Syria.
We make it clear to all that we
don't make
any official links with any
political or military
a group in Syria.
MARCIA BIGGS: Do you have any
agreement with
ISIS to be able to work in those
areas?
RAED AL SALEH (through
translator): We go
and say we will offer our
services.
If you allow us to do so, fine.
If you don't, off we go.
MARCIA BIGGS: Has any other
group this large
been able to unify in rebel-held
Syria?
RAED AL SALEH (through
translator): All over
Syria, there is no other
organization that
offers these services and works
under one
management, other than the
Syrian Civil Defense.
MARCIA BIGGS: Their tenacious
leader has gone
all over the world, begging for
an end to
the violence, last year, an
impassioned speech
at the United Nations, this year
nominated
for the Nobel Peace Prize, all
to no avail.
RAED AL SALEH (through
translator): In all
my speeches, I was delivering a
message to
the people, to be in solidarity
with us.
I wasn't asking politicians to
do that.
Politicians aren't concerned
about human suffering.
They don't look at the problem
and get involved
to solve it.
They see the problems as
opportunities, to
see what they can get out of
them.
MARCIA BIGGS: Is anyone
listening to you?
RAED AL SALEH (through
translator): We hope
there are people listening to
us.
We hope the people will stand by
us, to pressure
politicians to change their
policies, which
only benefit politicians, and
instead to base
those policies on human rights
and to take
into account the crimes
committed against
civilians all over the world.
MARCIA BIGGS: Do you feel like
you're banging
your head against a wall?
RAED AL SALEH (through
translator): Actually,
I used to feel like I was
hitting my head
against a wall.
Now I feel like I'm hitting my
head against
iron.
MARCIA BIGGS: So, how do you
keep going when
no one is listening?
RAED AL SALEH (through
translator): We have
to.
What keeps us going are the
people we save
from the rubble.
People in Syria see us as the
hope that keeps
them alive.
MARCIA BIGGS: One of their most
hopeful moments
came in the summer of 2014;
29-year-old Khaled
Omar Harrah had already been
digging through
the rubble for nine hours when
he heard the
faint sounds of a baby crying.
Only two weeks old, baby Mahmud
was trapped
under three stories of a
collapsed building.
For several more hours, they
gingerly dug,
finally pulling him out alive.
Khaled's video went viral, and
he was nicknamed
the baby savior.
But, in Syria, cruelty lies
around every corner.
Just over a week ago, Khaled was
killed in
an airstrike, joining the other
134 White
Helmets that have lost their
lives.
Khaled's unit was based in
rebel-held Aleppo,
which has been besieged for over
a month by
government forces, which allow
no food or
medical aid to the over 300,000
civilians
trapped inside.
The head of the Aleppo unit
recently sent
to the United Nations Security
Council this
video.
Throughout the message, a battle
rages in
the background.
MAN (through translator): What
broke our hearts
is that we heard nothing from
the U.N.
MARCIA BIGGS: Abdul Rahman, a
30-year-old
volunteer from Aleppo, says the
food shortage
is a main concern and half of
the men in the
unit are trying to learn to
farm.
Are they worried that they might
starve?
Are they worried that they're
going to run
out of food?
ABDUL RAHMAN, Rescue Worker: Of
course, but
they're still working, because
we believe
in our job.
They lost the hope.
This is the bigger problem.
Now, in Aleppo city, all the
world see the
besieged.
And all the world just watching
what happened,
and no one do anything.
MARCIA BIGGS: Despite all the
deaths and the
failures of the international
community, the
White Helmets soldier on.
RAED AL SALEH (through
translator): It's difficult
to talk with our team everyday,
and most of
the time, we have no answers to
all the questions
they ask.
We are doing an important
humanitarian job,
and we will be rewarded by God.
The Koran says, in the name of
God, the most
gracious, the most merciful,
whosoever saveth
the life of one, it shall be as
if he had
saved the life of all mankind.
If you save a human who was
under the rubble,
it's like you saved all mankind.
Do you feel proud when you wear
that?
For Radi, his uniform a symbol
of pride, and
for the young man who dreamed of
one day getting
out of Syria, a renewed pride in
his country,
which he and the others hope to
someday rebuild.
RADI SAAD (through translator):
Before the
revolution, we didn't have a
sense of belonging
to this country at all.
But now we feel that, if we
don't build this
country, no one will.
MARCIA BIGGS: A small glimmer of
hope for
the future.
For now, every airstrike brings
more devastation,
and the men, like this one,
Fares Mohammed
Ali, who dig with their hands
and their hearts
to raise people out of the ruins
and into
the light.
One can only wonder how long
this light of
hope can burn.
Fares died last month after an
airstrike.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Marcia Biggs in
Istanbul, Turkey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The decision by a
Texas judge
to block the Obama
administration's rules
on transgender bathrooms and
locker rooms
comes just as the school year is
starting.
And it's coming as many school
districts are
trying to determine what to do
now.
William Brangham has our update.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This ruling is
the second
setback in recent weeks for
transgender advocates.
Earlier this month, the Supreme
Court said
a Virginia school board could
block a transgender
student from using the boys
bathroom while
the higher court decides if it
will take up
these broader case.
Yesterday's decision is the
first to say that
the Obama administration's
directive could
be blocked nationwide.
Those directives instructed
school districts
to allow trans students to use
the bathroom
of their choice.
Texas is one of 13 states
challenging the
constitutionality of the
directive.
In this case, the judge wrote
that the administration
had exceeded its authority under
Title IX,
the 1970s-era law banning sex
discrimination
in schools.
To help us wade through the
meaning of all
this, I'm joined now by Evie
Blad, who is
the Education Week reporter
who's been covering
this story.
So, Evie, what does this ruling
say, and how
significant is this?
EVIE BLAD, Education Week: It's
very significant,
in that it's the first time we
have heard
a federal court weigh in on a
nationwide basis.
There are several cases winding
their way
through the federal courts now,
but the only
one that has had a ruling so far
applied only
in one circuit.
And it's significant, in that
the school year
is about to start, and this
judge is saying,
nationwide, that the Obama
administration's
regulations under Title IX, its
civil rights
guidance, doesn't need to be
implemented.
So what that means is if a
school doesn't
want to create a policy allowing
transgender
students to use the rest room of
their choice,
it doesn't have to.
But if a school has a policy
that it wants
to have, it can keep that
policy.
It just doesn't have a federal
directive to
do so.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, Texas was
one of a bunch
of states that had objection to
these rules.
What is the essence of their
objection?
EVIE BLAD: Well, there are two
primary things
that you will see in these
lawsuits.
One is something that we're all
familiar with,
which is the argument that folks
are making
about privacy rights of
students.
Does my student or my child who
isn't transgender
have a right to use a restroom
that doesn't
have transgender students in it?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Right.
EVIE BLAD: There is some
discomfort because
some students who have undergone
gender transitions
haven't undergone sex
transitions.
And so there's some discomfort
there.
But the primary argument is one
of legal interpretation.
The question is, when the Obama
administration
created the civil rights
guidance, did it
interpret an existing
regulation, which is
what it argues it did, or, what
the states
argue that it did is that it
created a new
one under the guise of
interpreting law.
And if it was to create a new
policy, the
states argue that it should have
gone through
the Administrative Procedures
Act, and given
them time to comment and weigh
in on the issue.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, that's
what the judge
said in this case, that the way
the Obama
administration went about
issuing the directive
was what was illegal, in its
view?
EVIE BLAD: Yes, he said that the
states had
proven that there's merit to
this case, so
it's worth hearing.
So, this is a temporary delay.
So, what he's doing is, he's
halting the directive
until he has a chance to hear
and weigh in
on the full case.
But, yes, he said his order was
pretty clear
that they may have violated the
Administrative
Procedures Act.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So that's the
judge's ruling,
but as we have seen with a lot
of these laws
around the country, some of the
resistance
to them comes from the belief
that somehow
if these laws are passed, that
men, not transgender
men, are going to somehow dress
up as women
and go into the women's
restrooms.
Is there any evidence that that
kind of activity
actually goes on?
EVIE BLAD: Right.
Well, and the argument at the
school level
is oftentimes that boys will
decide one day
to be one thing and another
thing, that there
will be some mischievousness,
right?
Well, long before the federal
regulations
came out, or long before the
Obama administration
began asserting these things in
courts, school
districts were making these
decisions on their
own.
So, L.A. Unified, for example,
the second...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Los Angeles.
EVIE BLAD: Yes, the second
largest district
in the country, for more than a
decade, has
had a policy that allowed
transgender students
to use the restroom that aligned
with their
gender identity.
L.A. Unified says that they can
count on one
hand the numbers of times a
student has had
to clarify these accommodations
in administrative
offices.
And they don't have any
documented incidents
of problems, the last time I
checked.
Part of the problem here is that
we are talking
to districts who are oftentimes
defending
policies they feel very strongly
about.
Some opponents of these policies
may say,
even if there aren't these big
documented
problems, that they still feel
that their
students have some privacy
interests here
that need to be respected.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, if I'm a
transgender
student and I start school
tomorrow, next
week, two weeks from now, what
does this ruling
mean for me?
EVIE BLAD: Right.
Well, if your school doesn't
have a policy
that directs what restroom
you're allowed
to use, you don't have the
ability to take
enforcement through the
Department of Education,
because the judge has said you
can't enforce
this directive.
Previously, a transgender
student could go
to the department and say: I
feel like my
civil rights are being violated.
Right now, that has been put on
hold through
this order.
Transgender students say that
bathrooms are
not their only concern in
school, sort of
feeling safe and a sense of
belonging, but
they say that they do matter,
because when
a school doesn't allow them to
use the restroom
of their choice or requires them
to use a
single stall or staff restroom,
they say that
it feels like the school isn't
respecting
their gender transition.
And that can stigmatize them or
bring other
school climate concerns with
their classmates.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, there's a
lot of different
legal cases going on, in Texas,
and Virginia
and other places.
Is your sense, is the legal
analysis here
that this is ultimately going to
end up at
the Supreme Court?
EVIE BLAD: There's a lot of
folks in school
law who felt that it was bound
for that for
a long time.
There is a decision in Virginia
that the school
court -- the Supreme Court has
put a temporary
hold on that case.
In that instance, the court of
appeals sided
with the Obama administration on
these rules
and said that it is an
appropriate interpretation
of Title IX.
But the Supreme Court put a
temporary halt
on that while it decides whether
it is going
to consider the issue in its
next term.
In that case, we could get an
ultimate decision.
Even if the Supreme Court
decides not to take
up that case, we could see
differing issues
-- differing opinions on the
circuit court
level.
And in that case, a lot of
times, those issues
end up going to the Supreme
Court for further
clarity.
So, chances are, it might end up
there sooner
or later.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Evie Blad of
Education Week, thank you very
much.
EVIE BLAD: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's a first for
the International
Criminal Court at The Hague, a
trial dealing
with the destruction of cultural
heritage..
It's over the deliberate
wrecking in 2012
of historic earthen buildings
and religious
shrines in the West African
nation of Mali.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
It's part of our ongoing series
Culture at
Risk.
JEFFREY BROWN: Sixty holy tombs
dating back
to the 14th century, all reduced
to rubble
in a wave of violence unleashed
on Timbuktu
by Islamist militants four years
ago.
Today, one of those responsible
stood in front
of the International Criminal
Court and admitted
his guilt.
AHMAD AL FAQI AL MAHDI,
Defendant (through
translator): I regret all the
damage that
my actions have caused.
I regret what I have caused to
my family,
my community in Timbuktu, what I
have caused
my home nation, Mali.
JEFFREY BROWN: Prosecutors say
Ahmad Al Faqi
Al Mahdi directed the
destruction of nine
mausoleums and damage to a
mosque.
He'd been recruited to lead a
vice squad by
a group of Islamist rebels,
affiliated with
al-Qaida, who seized control of
Northern Mali
in 2012.
AHMAD AL FAQI AL MAHDI (through
translator):
I was influenced by a group of
deviant people
from al-Qaida, and they were
able to influence
me, to carry me in their evil
wave, through
actions that affected the whole
population.
JEFFREY BROWN: The rebels were
eventually
driven out by French troops in
2013.
The heaps of rubble they left
behind have
since mostly been rebuilt with
help from UNESCO.
In recent years, cultural relics
across Northern
Africa and the Mideast have been
targeted
by militant groups, most
dramatically by the
Islamic State at sites including
the ancient
cities of Palmyra, Syria, and
Nimrud in Iraq.
Unlike Mali, those countries are
not subject
to the jurisdiction of the ICC.
Mahdi, who, in the plea bargain
faces 11 years
in prison, today called for an
end to such
acts.
AHMAD AL FAQI AL MAHDI (through
translator):
I would like to give a piece of
advice to
Muslims all over the world, not
to get involved
in the same acts I got involved
in, because
they are not going to lead to
any good to
humanity.
JEFFREY BROWN: Human rights
groups say Mahdi
and others also committed crimes
against the
local community, including rape
and sexual
slavery.
The ICC says further charges may
follow.
And for more on this case and
its broader
implications, we're joined by
Patty Gerstenblith.
She's a professor of law at
DePaul University
and head of its Center for Art,
Museum and
Cultural Heritage Law.
Welcome to you.
First thing I want to ask is,
how significant
is this case as a war crime
prosecution?
PATTY GERSTENBLITH, DePaul
University: Yes,
it is very significant.
It's the first case that we have
on an international
level where somebody was
prosecuted only for
the crime of destruction of
cultural heritage.
We have other examples of
prosecutions during
the World War II and the Balkan
conflict,
but in all those cases, the
defendants had
committed a variety of war
crimes and crimes
against humanity, things like
mass killings
of civilians, rapes, things like
that.
So, this is the first case we
have where the
defendant was charged only with
destruction
of cultural heritage.
And I believe it's significant
because it
sends a message that the
international community
will take these kinds of crimes,
these kind
of destructions seriously.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why has it taken
so long, or
why is it so hard to bring these
kind of cases?
Is it the lack of the law or the
lack of the
will to bring these cases?
PATTY GERSTENBLITH: I would say
it's a variety.
The laws, until this point, have
been based
-- or the prosecutions have been
based on
special criminal tribunals that
were set up,
such as the Nuremberg tribunal
and the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia
following the Balkan conflict.
And, as I said, in those cases,
there were
many, many things, horrible
things that were
done, of which cultural property
destruction
was just one.
And, unfortunately, the
international community
didn't always regard the
cultural heritage
destruction as necessarily the
most significant
of the different kinds of crimes
that were
committed.
We now have the structure of the
International
Criminal Court established by
the Rome Statute.
And that's where this particular
prosecution
was brought.
There is always the problem that
different
countries have ratified
different international
conventions.
And so you can only bring a
prosecution when
a country has ratified the
appropriate instrument.
In this case, Mali is a member
of the International
Criminal Court.
It has ratified the Rome
Statute, which made
this feasible under this
particular legislation.
This perhaps at this point was
brought as
a sole charge, sole crime,
because of what
we're witnessing going on,
particularly in
the Middle East, where we have
the Islamic
State carrying out large-scale
destruction
of cultural and religious sites.
This has not been seen on this
kind of a level
with this much publicity in a
long time, and
certainly not things that we
have seen in
real time happening.
And the world has stood by and
seen this happen.
And now we have finally been
able to send
a message that these kinds of
destructions
will be taken seriously by the
international
community.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, when you look
at this specific
Timbuktu case, though, can you
say why it
was successful?
Are there particulars there?
Before we use it to see how it
might look
to other cases, what happened
there?
PATTY GERSTENBLITH: Well, I
think one of the
most important things that made
this case
feasible, first of all, the law
was in place,
as I mentioned, the
international law.
Secondly, it happened that Mr.
Al Mahdi was
apprehended in a different
country, but he
was then turned over to the
International
Criminal Court.
But I think the most important
thing from
a straight factual or
evidentiary perspective
is that there were films that
were made, videos
that were made of him destroying
and directing
the destruction, and, in fact,
bragging about
his role in destroying these
sites, because,
remember that, in a lot of these
cases, it's
-- when a case is brought
sometimes years
after something has been done,
proving exactly
who did what becomes difficult.
So we can have documentation
that a site was
destroyed.
We can say, oh, this clearly
violated international
law, but proving exactly who and
under what
circumstances did it, proving
the intentionality,
and then proving the identity of
the person
who carried it out.
So, for example, in the Balkan
cases, the
cases of destruction in Bosnia
and in Croatia,
it was often difficult to
determine exactly
who was responsible, who gave
the order, who
carried it out.
And was it intentional?
And also I guess another
important aspect
is that there was no armed
conflict going
on at the time that the shrines
in Timbuktu
were destroyed.
In most cases, destruction of
cultural heritage
can be excused to what's called
military necessity.
This was an example in Timbuktu
where there
was clearly no military
necessity for carrying
out the destruction.
JEFFREY BROWN: You have
mentioned -- and,
of course, we have reported on
these dramatic
cases in Syria and Iraq and
elsewhere -- the
widespread scale of them now.
Can you see this case in
Timbuktu as a real
precedent that might have an
impact?
PATTY GERSTENBLITH: I certainly
think it is
a precedent.
It's a very good precedent.
Whether it will have an impact
is always difficult
to tell, because, presumably,
the Islamic
State members who are carrying
out the most
egregious of the destruction,
maybe they're
not worried about whether some
day they will
be brought before a criminal
tribunal.
It will be difficult to tell
exactly who ordered
the destruction.
I also think that there is a
message that
other destructions, particularly
in Syria,
for example, being carried out
by the Assad
regime, perhaps accidentally,
perhaps intentionally,
perhaps negligently or an
extreme form of
negligence.
So, I hope the message is going
not only to
the obvious examples of the
Islamic State,
but also to other governments,
to other individuals
who also are carrying out or are
responsible
for this kind of heritage
destruction.
JEFFREY BROWN: Patty
Gerstenblith, thank you
very much.
PATTY GERSTENBLITH: Sure.
Thank you, Jeff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One Massachusetts
couple is
on a mission to end hunger in
their town of
Framingham about 20 miles
outside of Boston.
As Tina Martin from PBS member
station WGBH
reports, their trailer full of
food is making
a difference in the lives of
low-income families.
It's also helping keep their
son's memory
alive.
TINA MARTIN: One smile and one
plate of food
at a time is how David and
Alicia Blais of
Framingham plan to knock out
hunger in their
hometown.
ALICIA BLAIS, Daniel's Table:
Hi.
How are you?
DAVID BLAIS, Daniel's Table:
Over dinner one
night, I was talking to Alicia.
And I said, what if we just
solved it?
What would it look like if we
just solved
hunger in Framingham?
ALICIA BLAIS: You know yourself,
when you're
hungry, you don't study well,
you don't work
well, you don't think straight.
TINA MARTIN: The Greater Boston
Food Bank
estimates about one in 12 people
in Eastern
Massachusetts get assistance
with food.
Many are families with children.
That especially touched the
couple who started
Daniel's Table two years ago.
DAVID BLAIS: My son Daniel died
at birth 21
years ago.
And when we started with this
project, we
thought that we would name it
after him.
It's kind of a motivating factor
for me.
TINA MARTIN: Their food trailer
is designed
with a picture of Daniel as his
parents picture
him.
They fill it up and hitch it to
their pick
up truck and head to different
neighborhoods
in what's considered the largest
town in the
country.
This trailer can serve about 200
to 300 people?
DAVID BLAIS: Right, just about
200 to 300.
TINA MARTIN: And how many times
are you going
out a week?
DAVID BLAIS: We go out three
nights a week
with the trailer, and then we do
something
with the Salvation Army on
Saturdays.
TINA MARTIN: We met them in
Freddie Franjul's
neighborhood, where seeing the
truck is a
huge relief.
FREDDIE FRANJUL, Father:
Actually, it's a
big deal for pretty much family
around here,
because everyone is on low
incomes.
TINA MARTIN: Franjul is a single
dad raising
three girls.
FREDDIE FRANJUL: Well, like,
tonight, we didn't
have to spend money on dinner.
And we take advantage of this
opportunity
over here.
DAVID BLAIS: If we can cover a
couple of meals
a week for them, then they're
able to manage
their budget.
TINA MARTIN: That's the idea,
especially when
school is out.
These hot dogs and hamburgers
often replace
meals children would otherwise
receive through
free lunch programs.
DAVID BLAIS: Summer is probably
the most challenging
time for some of these kids,
because their
parents are now going to have to
feed them
three times a day, instead of
just once.
TINA MARTIN: David and Alicia
feed close to
1,000 a week for free.
Expenses like food, equipment,
and gas for
the truck add up.
They have some donors and
something else.
DAVID BLAIS: We pray a lot.
It's probably our -- we probably
get our strongest
response when we do that.
TINA MARTIN: And prayer works.
They just bought a bigger
trailer that can
feed about 3,000 people a day.
Alicia thinks they have an angel
watching
over them, the son who is always
with them
in spirit.
ALICIA BLAIS: I think he looks
down on and
probably helps make it all
happen.
TINA MARTIN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Tina
Martin in Framingham,
Massachusetts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: Texas
singer-songwriter-artist Hayes
Carll talks about his influences
and his latest
album in a video on our Art Beat
page.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening, when Green Party
candidate Jill Stein
joins us.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.